Provision documentation (#104)
mattermost/mattermost-plugin-apps: docs/07-lifecycle.md

## Development
## Submit to Marketplace
## Provision
### App Bundle

> App bundle contains `manifest.json` file, `static/` folder and one or several lambda function bundles.

Reviewer: We should probably have an AWS version of Hello World manifest here

Author: We already have the hello manifest in the docs right? Should I duplicate?

> App bundle contains `manifest.json` file, `static/` folder and one or several lambda function bundles.

Reviewer 2: We should prob. start with stating the purpose of the app bundle, what process uses it, etc. before describing what it is composed of.

> - `static/` folder may contain static files app needs. They are automatically provisioned and stored in the AWS S3 bucket. 

Reviewer 2: we should prob. call out if these files are ALL the static files an app can have/needs (or does it depend if it is an http vs. AWS hosted app, etc. ).

> - `manifest.json` file contains details about the app such as appID, appVersion, appType(http or an AWS app), requested permissions, requested locations, and information about the functions.

Reviewer 2: worth being specific on the "information".

> - Each of the lambda function bundles is a valid and runnable AWS lambda function, which are provisioned in the AWS by the Gitlab pipeline. 

Reviewer 2: Is there a versioned specification/structure for lambda functions? (like the ones in the bundle should respect format version X).

### Provisioning In The 3rd Party AWS

> Provisioning in the third party AWS cloud environment is done by the **appsctl** which reads appropriate AWS credentials from environment variables:

Reviewer 2: we should prob. detail which appsctl command does the actual provisioning  and call out appsctl as a tool/script, etc.

`APPS_PROVISION_AWS_ACCESS_KEY`

`APPS_PROVISION_AWS_SECRET_KEY`

We need an app bundle to provision an app. The bundle might be provisioned from the local disk, from S3(not implemented yet) or from some URL(not implemented yet). Provisioning consists of 3 parts:

1. Creating the lambda functions with appropriate policies
2. Storing static assets in the dedicated S3 bucket.
3. Storing app’s manifest file in the same dedicated S3 bucket.

> AWS Lambda functions have semantic names, which means that a function described in the manifest.json file translates to AWS as `$appID_$appVersion_$functionName` to avoid collisions with other apps' or other versions' functions. And **appsctl** provisions lambda functions using this name.

Reviewer 2: "semantic names" - example? and example of mapping to AWS name.

Dedicated S3 bucket name is stored in the environment variable 

`MM_APPS_S3_BUCKET`

which stores all apps' static assets and manifest files. 

> All files in the static folder of the bundle are considered to be the app's static assets. And are stored in the above mentioned bucket. Stored assets also have semantic keys and are generated using the rule - `static/$appID_$appVersion/filename`. 

Reviewer 2: can we detail more about the "semantic keys" in this context?

The `manifest.json` file of an app is stored in the same S3 bucket as well with the key - `manifests/$appID_$appVersion.json`.

### Provisioning In Mattermost AWS Cloud

> To be provisioned in AWS mattermost cloud an app bundle is uploaded to the specific S3 bucket(`mattermost-apps-bucket`). On a new app release bundle is created by the circleCI and uploaded to S3(the same way plugins do right now). After that apps provisioning pipeline, running on GitlabCI, automatically detects the upload, creates appropriate lambda functions and assets the same way the **appsclt** does for the third party accounts. To generate lambda function names and asset keys apps provisioning pipeline needs additional variables for the terraform. Those are generated by the provisioning pipeline using the

Reviewer 2: "(the same way plugins do right now)" - propose we remove this - the audience will be the developer that might not have our context.
"On a new app release bundle" - propose to describe in more depth the process to get here.

Author: I think app release process could be determined elsewhere

`go run ./cmd/appsctl/ generate-terraform-data /PATH/TO/YOUR/APP/BUNDLE` command or calling the `aws.GetProvisionDataFromFile(/PATH/TO/YOUR/APP/BUNDLE)` from the Proxy Plugin.

## Publish

> publishing or registering an app in a Mattermost installation means the app will be shown in the Marketplace of the installation and it can be later installed by the sysadmin and used by the users. On a totally new app registration or on a registration of the new version of the already registered app, a new version of the Proxy Plugin is cut. `apps.json` file is updated and a new app is added in the listing. Later, plugin is installed in the appropriate installations(using feature flags if necessary). After the plugin update Proxy Plugin synchronizes the list of the registered apps by downloading appropriate manifests from the S3 and storing them in memory. So the Marketplace shows renewed app listings and sysadmin can install a new app(or new version).

Reviewer: we need to simplify terminology - published, registered, listed, (or else?)

Reviewer: @iomodo ^^ is mostly for @justinegeffen to edit away, optional for this PR AFAIC.

> publishing or registering an app in a Mattermost installation means the app will be shown in the Marketplace of the installation and it can be later installed by the sysadmin and used by the users. On a totally new app registration or on a registration of the new version of the already registered app, a new version of the Proxy Plugin is cut. `apps.json` file is updated and a new app is added in the listing. Later, plugin is installed in the appropriate installations(using feature flags if necessary). After the plugin update Proxy Plugin synchronizes the list of the registered apps by downloading appropriate manifests from the S3 and storing them in memory. So the Marketplace shows renewed app listings and sysadmin can install a new app(or new version).

Reviewer 2: apps.json -> manifests.json?

> publishing or registering an app in a Mattermost installation means the app will be shown in the Marketplace of the installation and it can be later installed by the sysadmin and used by the users. On a totally new app registration or on a registration of the new version of the already registered app, a new version of the Proxy Plugin is cut. `apps.json` file is updated and a new app is added in the listing. Later, plugin is installed in the appropriate installations(using feature flags if necessary). After the plugin update Proxy Plugin synchronizes the list of the registered apps by downloading appropriate manifests from the S3 and storing them in memory. So the Marketplace shows renewed app listings and sysadmin can install a new app(or new version).

Reviewer 2: "On a totally new app registration or on a registration of the new version of the already registered app, a new version of the Proxy Plugin is cut" - is this indeed the case?

Author: We have to change the `manifests.json` file so it will be tied to the PP release

It is worth mentioning here that Proxy Plugin needs AWS credentials to download from S3 as well as to invoke lambda functions. Those credentials are read from the following environment variables:

`APPS_INVOKE_AWS_ACCESS_KEY`

`APPS_INVOKE_AWS_SECRET_KEY`

## Install
Installing is a process when sysadmin installs provisioned and already registered/published apps in their Mattermost installation. As mentioned above list of the registered apps are in the memory of the Proxy Plugin. Whenever sysadmin executes an install slash command or clicks the install button in the Marketplace appropriate permissions are requested and the app is installed. A bot and an OAuth app are created on installation, `OnInstall` call is sent to the app(relevant lambda function) as well.

> Apps are installed with `apps install 

Reviewer 2: I believe we should also add some diagrams to describe the various flows.

## Development
## Submit to Marketplace
## Provision
### App Bundle

> Bundle is a convenient way to deliver an app to the Mattermost ecosystem. It provides a way to organize code and resources needed for an app to run. A bundle is created by the developer of the app. Mattermost uses bundles to provision and install/uninstall apps. 

Reviewer 3: I suggest we go with `app bundle` as `bundle` is quite generic and it's not clear on first sight what it means.

```suggestion
An app bundle is a convenient way to deliver an app to the Mattermost ecosystem. It provides a way to organize code and resources needed for an app to run. An app bundle is created by the developer of the app. Mattermost uses app bundles to provision and install/uninstall apps. 
```

> App bundle contains `manifest.json` file, `static/` folder and one or several lambda function bundles.

Reviewer 3: Does it have to contain a `static` folder? What is the bare minimum?

> - `static/` folder contains all the static files app needs. For the Mattermost AWS Apps static files are automatically provisioned and stored in the dedicated AWS S3 bucket(`mattermost-apps-bucket-production`). Apps can use them whenever they wish by providing the static file name to the Proxy Plugin. For the third-party hosted AWS apps static files are stored in the different S3 bucket(specified by the third-party). For the HTTP Apps, when creating a server, developer should store the static files in the `/static/file_name` relative URL.

Reviewer 3: 0/5 Do we really need to put the bucket name in the docs?

> - `static/` folder contains all the static files app needs. For the Mattermost AWS Apps static files are automatically provisioned and stored in the dedicated AWS S3 bucket(`mattermost-apps-bucket-production`). Apps can use them whenever they wish by providing the static file name to the Proxy Plugin. For the third-party hosted AWS apps static files are stored in the different S3 bucket(specified by the third-party). For the HTTP Apps, when creating a server, developer should store the static files in the `/static/file_name` relative URL.

Reviewer 3: Do we have a universal way to writing variable in the docs? Something like
```suggestion
- `static/` folder contains all the static files app needs. For the Mattermost AWS Apps static files are automatically provisioned and stored in the dedicated AWS S3 bucket(`mattermost-apps-bucket-production`). Apps can use them whenever they wish by providing the static file name to the Proxy Plugin. For the third-party hosted AWS apps static files are stored in the different S3 bucket(specified by the third-party). For the HTTP Apps, when creating a server, developer should store the static files in the `/static/$FILE_NAME` relative URL.
```

> - `static/` folder contains all the static files app needs. For the Mattermost AWS Apps static files are automatically provisioned and stored in the dedicated AWS S3 bucket(`mattermost-apps-bucket-production`). Apps can use them whenever they wish by providing the static file name to the Proxy Plugin. For the third-party hosted AWS apps static files are stored in the different S3 bucket(specified by the third-party). For the HTTP Apps, when creating a server, developer should store the static files in the `/static/file_name` relative URL.

Reviewer 3: Are we considering third party AWS apps in this docs? We neither support that nor do we know if we will, right?

Author: Correct, we do not support them for now. I'll mention that

> - `static/` folder contains all the static files app needs. For the Mattermost AWS Apps static files are automatically provisioned and stored in the dedicated AWS S3 bucket(`mattermost-apps-bucket-production`). Apps can use them whenever they wish by providing the static file name to the Proxy Plugin. For the third-party hosted AWS apps static files are stored in the different S3 bucket(specified by the third-party). For the HTTP Apps, when creating a server, developer should store the static files in the `/static/file_name` relative URL.

Reviewer 3: I'm 3/5 against using the term `Proxy Plugin` as it isn't obvious what the term means. Also, the plugin is more the a proxy. Can we use something more obvious as `Apps Plugin`?

- `manifest.json` file contains details about the app such as appID, appVersion, appType(http or an AWS app), requested permissions, requested locations, and information about the  functions such as function Path, name, runtime and handler.
- Each of the lambda function bundles is a valid and runnable AWS lambda function, which are provisioned in the AWS by the [Mattermost Apps Cloud Deployer](https://github.com/mattermost/mattermost-apps-cloud-deployer).
AWS Lambda function bundle is a `.zip` file which contains scripts or compiled programs and their dependencies. Note that it must be less than 50 MB. Exact specification of the bundle varies for different runtimes. For example one can see more details for `node.js` bundles [here](https://docs.aws.amazon.com/lambda/latest/dg/nodejs-package.html) 

> ### Provisioning In The 3rd Party AWS

Reviewer 3: Should we make this as the "dev way" as this is the main use case right now?

Provisioning in the third party AWS cloud environment is done by the **appsctl** tool using the command

> `go run ./cmd/appsctl/ provision app /PATH/TO/YOUR/APP/BUNDLE`

Reviewer 3: Should we recommend `go install` instead? Otherwise we also have to document the `git clone`.

Author: I was under impression that app developer would already have the proxy plugin cloned. Isn't it a case?

Reviewer 3: I don't think we mention that anywhere. Encouraging people to run `go install github.com/mattermost/mattermost-plugin-apps/cmd/appsctl@latest` seems like a good way to get a user starting.

The `manifest.json` file of an app is stored in the same S3 bucket as well with the key - `manifests/$appID_$appVersion.json`.

![](imgs/provisioning-in-3rd-party-aws.png)

### Provisioning In Mattermost AWS Cloud
To be provisioned in AWS mattermost cloud an app bundle is uploaded to the specific S3 bucket(`mattermost-apps-bucket`). On a new app release, bundle is created by the circleCI and uploaded to S3. [Mattermost apps cloud deployer](https://github.com/mattermost/mattermost-apps-cloud-deployer), running as a k8s cron job every hour, detects the S3 upload, creates appropriate lambda functions, assets and manifest the same way the **appsclt** does for the third party accounts. The deployer needs lambda function names, asset keys and manifest key to provision the app. It calls the `aws.GetProvisionDataFromFile(/PATH/TO/THE/APP/BUNDLE)` from the Proxy Plugin to get the provision data. Same data can be generated using the
`go run ./cmd/appsctl/ generate-terraform-data /PATH/TO/YOUR/APP/BUNDLE` 
![](imgs/provisioning-in-mm-aws.png)

## Publish

> publishing or registering an app in a Mattermost installation means the app will be shown in the Marketplace of the installation and it can be later installed by the sysadmin and used by the users. On a totally new app registration or on a registration of the new version of the already registered app, a new version of the Proxy Plugin is cut. `manifests.json` file is updated and a new app is added in the listing. Later, plugin is installed in the appropriate installations(using feature flags if necessary). After the plugin update Proxy Plugin synchronizes the list of the registered apps by downloading appropriate manifests from the S3 and storing them in memory. So the Marketplace shows renewed app listings and sysadmin can install a new app(or new version).

Reviewer 3: Let's clean up the naming here. What does `Publish` mean vs. `Register`? Is that is the same? Or is one about the status of an app release and the other about the process?

Author: I'll leave it to @justinegeffen

> publishing or registering an app in a Mattermost installation means the app will be shown in the Marketplace of the installation and it can be later installed by the sysadmin and used by the users. On a totally new app registration or on a registration of the new version of the already registered app, a new version of the Proxy Plugin is cut. `manifests.json` file is updated and a new app is added in the listing. Later, plugin is installed in the appropriate installations(using feature flags if necessary). After the plugin update Proxy Plugin synchronizes the list of the registered apps by downloading appropriate manifests from the S3 and storing them in memory. So the Marketplace shows renewed app listings and sysadmin can install a new app(or new version).

Reviewer 3: This section seems to have MM staff as the audience. Should we make that clear here and maybe move it do a separate doc?

Author: I'm 0/5

It is worth mentioning here that Proxy Plugin needs AWS credentials to download from S3 as well as to invoke lambda functions. Those credentials are read from the following environment variables:

`APPS_INVOKE_AWS_ACCESS_KEY`

`APPS_INVOKE_AWS_SECRET_KEY`

## Install

> Installing is a process when sysadmin installs provisioned and already registered/published apps in their Mattermost installation. As mentioned above list of the registered apps are in the memory of the Proxy Plugin. Whenever sysadmin executes an install slash command or clicks the install button in the Marketplace appropriate permissions are requested and the app is installed. A bot and an OAuth app are created on installation, `OnInstall` call is sent to the app(relevant lambda function) as well.

Reviewer 2: Should we also mention the "builtin" apps here (usage, flows, etc.)?

> App bundle contains `manifest.json` file, `static/` folder and one or several lambda function bundles.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
The app bundle contains a `manifest.json` file, a `static/` folder, and one or several lambda function bundles.
```

> - `static/` folder contains all the static files app needs. For the Mattermost AWS Apps static files are automatically provisioned and stored in the dedicated AWS S3 bucket(`mattermost-apps-bucket-production`). Apps can use them whenever they wish by providing the static file name to the Proxy Plugin. For the third-party hosted AWS apps static files are stored in the different S3 bucket(specified by the third-party). For the HTTP Apps, when creating a server, developer should store the static files in the `/static/file_name` relative URL.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
- The `static/` folder contains all the static files the app needs. For the Mattermost AWS apps static files are automatically provisioned and stored in the dedicated AWS S3 bucket (`mattermost-apps-bucket-production`). 

Apps have unlimited access to them by providing the static file name to the proxy plugin. For the third-party hosted AWS apps, static files are stored in a different S3 bucket (specified by the third-party). For the HTTP apps, when creating a server, the developer should store the static files in the `/static/file_name` relative URL.
```

> - `manifest.json` file contains details about the app such as appID, appVersion, appType(http or an AWS app), requested permissions, requested locations, and information about the  functions such as function Path, name, runtime and handler.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
- The `manifest.json` file contains details about the app such as appID, appVersion, appType (HTTP or AWS), requested permissions, requested locations, and information about the  functions such as function path, name, runtime, and handler.
```

> - Each of the lambda function bundles is a valid and runnable AWS lambda function, which are provisioned in the AWS by the [Mattermost Apps Cloud Deployer](https://github.com/mattermost/mattermost-apps-cloud-deployer).

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
- Each of the lambda function bundles is a valid and runnable AWS Lambda function, provisioned in AWS by the [Mattermost Apps Cloud Deployer](https://github.com/mattermost/mattermost-apps-cloud-deployer).
```

> AWS Lambda function bundle is a `.zip` file which contains scripts or compiled programs and their dependencies. Note that it must be less than 50 MB. Exact specification of the bundle varies for different runtimes. For example one can see more details for `node.js` bundles [here](https://docs.aws.amazon.com/lambda/latest/dg/nodejs-package.html) 

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
The AWS Lambda function bundle is a `.zip` file which contains scripts or compiled programs and their dependencies. Note that it must be less than 50 MB. 

The exact specification of the bundle varies for different runtimes. For example one can see more details for `node.js` bundles [here](https://docs.aws.amazon.com/lambda/latest/dg/nodejs-package.html).
```

> ### Provisioning In The 3rd Party AWS

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
### Provisioning in third-party AWS
```

### Provisioning In Mattermost AWS Cloud

> To be provisioned in AWS mattermost cloud an app bundle is uploaded to the specific S3 bucket(`mattermost-apps-bucket`). On a new app release, bundle is created by the circleCI and uploaded to S3. [Mattermost apps cloud deployer](https://github.com/mattermost/mattermost-apps-cloud-deployer), running as a k8s cron job every hour, detects the S3 upload, creates appropriate lambda functions, assets and manifest the same way the **appsclt** does for the third party accounts. The deployer needs lambda function names, asset keys and manifest key to provision the app. It calls the `aws.GetProvisionDataFromFile(/PATH/TO/THE/APP/BUNDLE)` from the Proxy Plugin to get the provision data. Same data can be generated using the

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
To be provisioned in AWS Mattermost Cloud an app bundle is uploaded to the specific S3 bucket (`mattermost-apps-bucket`). On a new app release, a bundle is created by CircleCI and uploaded to S3. 

[Mattermost apps cloud deployer](https://github.com/mattermost/mattermost-apps-cloud-deployer), running as a k8s cron job every hour, detects the S3 upload, creates appropriate lambda functions, assets, and manifest the same way the `appsclt` does for the third-party accounts. 

The deployer needs lambda function names, asset keys, and manifest key to provision the app. It calls the `aws.GetProvisionDataFromFile (/PATH/TO/THE/APP/BUNDLE)` from the proxy plugin to get the provision data. Same data can be generated using the
```

Reviewer 4: The last sentence is missing a few words.

- Also Uninstall/Enable/Disable per App

## Uninstall
Sysadmin can uninstall an app from Marketplace or using the uninstall slash command. On uninstallation appropriate bot and an OAuth app are deleted, `OnUninstall` call is sent to the app as well. Worth mentioning that the current implementation is not deleting the user data.

> ## Upgrade/downgrade consideration

Reviewer 2: move (and expand) the upgrade discussion here? calling out not tackling downgrade?

Reviewer: I think this should be a separate ticket in Jira. The `master` implementation now sends `OnVersionChanged` message, and I propose that we only include the Bot credentials in it; Bot is sufficient to migrate the KV values stored; and to send users messages if they need to do something requiring user tokens.

I am 1/5 that we should scrape the "handling of upgrades/downgrades" altogether until we have a more solid use-case.

Reviewer 3: I'm with @levb here. Down/upgrade are a hard topic and we don't know good use cases right now.

- Also Uninstall/Enable/Disable per App

## Uninstall

> Sysadmin can uninstall an app from Marketplace or using the uninstall slash command. On uninstallation appropriate bot and an OAuth app are deleted, `OnUninstall` call is sent to the app as well. Worth mentioning that the current implementation is not deleting the user data.

Reviewer 3: An app can't be uninstalled via the Marketplace.
